Roberto Mancini Tactics and Coaching

The philosophy for the system of play
Before coming to City, Mancini played at Inter with two main systems, the 4-4-2 and the 4-3-1-2 (4-4-2 diamond). The only common factor in any team is the use of a back four. Mancini uses a zonal defending system, which alters depending on where the ball is during each phase of a game. With a 4-4-2, the defensive block is a bank of eight players made up of the four in defense and the four in midfield. The job of this block is to act as a compact unit, which would defend as one in front of the penalty area and would slide along the width of the field depending on whether the ball was in a wide or central position. The aim of defending with a compact block of eight is a focus on the area with the ball, using the concept that opposing players can move into attacking zones as long as they don’t receive the ball. This ball-oriented defending enables players to close down the area around the ball as effectively as possible. This also enables players to double up on the ball carrier. If the ball is moved into any area on either side of the penalty box, the fullback will pressure while a midfield player will rotate into the back four, making sure that in any defensive phase, a tight back four is maintained. The midfield player will drop into line with the ball and cut off any space behind the ball. Two holding midfield players will play close to central defenders and support them to prevent 1 v. 1 situations in central areas. When defending from a long ball played toward the back four, a central defender will attack the ball, and the remaining three defenders drop back to provide another line of coverage. The defending midfield player drops in to a support position to pressure any second ball. The two strikers also have to contribute to the defensive scheme in two ways, withdrawing to ensure all 11 players are between the ball and the goal and pressure the ball to force opposing players to play the ball long and prevent a coordinated buildup. This defensive setup provides the foundation for the attack; it employs the same concept of catenaccio in an updated form. The aim is to draw teams to specific areas of the field, regain possession of the ball and counterattack into the space behind the opposing team. This happens when the strikers play early, fast, one-touch soccer and combine through the defenders. The strikers also must move along the width of the field while defending and provide early options for passing when regaining the ball by the midfield or defensive players. This system worked best when Mancini packed his team with attacking speed and by adding a target man in the form of Ibrahimovich. If a counter is not possible after regaining the ball, possession would be maintained and attacks would be made into one of three key spaces. The ball could either be held around these areas until a killer pass is found or could be moved on fast through these areas via combination play. The key spaces are The wing area on the left side of the opponents’ half from the halfway line to the side of penalty area and the end line. The same area on the right side. A box from the end of the penalty area about 15 to 20 yards out, normally referred to as Zone 14, which is the space between the lines of defense and midfield line. The aim for attacking these key spaces is to hold the ball along the flanks in Zones 1 and 2 in order to find a precise killer pass or a cross to target player. Doing this sucks players over, creating space on the weaker side towards Zones 2 and 3 for passes and switches of play. The aim of Zone 3 is to play passing combinations, long shots and through passes from this area, pressuring the back four by moving in behind as much as possible on the attack. Direct running with players capable of winning attacking 1 v. 1 situations also is done at angles from these areas between fullbacks and center defending players. The goal is for a high speed of play, pace, precision passing and crossing, all of which are the keys to attacking in this system. With the 4-3-1-2, the goals of the system are much the same; however, there are differences. Defending is done with a block of seven players. That leaves three players to counterattack. Width relies more on attacking fullbacks.